Marc Randolph and Reed Hastings founded Netflix on August ,  in Scotts Valley, California. Randolph worked as a marketing director for Hastings's company, Pure Atria. Randolph had co-founded MicroWarehouse, a computer mail-order company; Borland International later employed him as vice president of marketing. Hastings, a computer scientist and mathematician, sold Pure Atria to Rational Software Corporation in  for $ million in what was then the biggest acquisition in Silicon Valley history. The two came up with the idea for Netflix when commuting between their homes in Santa Cruz and Pure Atria's headquarters in Sunnyvale while waiting for government regulators to approve the merger, although Hastings has given several different explanations for how the idea came about.

Hastings invested $. million in startup cash for Netflix. Randolph admired the fledgling e-commerce company Amazon and wanted to find a large category of portable items to sell over the Internet using a similar model. Hastings and Randolph considered and rejected VHS tapes as too expensive to stock and too delicate to ship. When they heard about DVDs, first introduced in the United States on March , , they tested the concept of selling or renting DVDs by mail by mailing a compact disc to Hastings's house in Santa Cruz. When the disc arrived intact, they decided to take on the $ billion home-video sales and rental industry. Hastings is often quoted saying that he decided to start Netflix after being fined $ at a Blockbuster store for being late to return a copy of Apollo , but he and Randolph designed this apocryphal story to explain the company's business model and motivation.

Netflix launched as the world's first online DVD-rental store, with only  employees and  titles available—almost the entire catalogue of DVDs at the time—using the pay-per-rent model, with rates and due dates similar to those of its brick-and-mortar competitor, Blockbuster.Netflix introduced the monthly subscription concept in September , and then dropped the single-rental model in early . Since that time (see Technical details of Netflix), the company has built its reputation on the business model of flat-fee unlimited rentals without due dates, late fees, shipping and handling fees, or per-title rental fees.

In , when Netflix had just about , subscribers and relied on the US Postal Service for the delivery of their DVDs, their losses would total $ million and offered to be acquired by Blockbuster for $ million. They proposed that Netflix, which would be renamed as Blockbuster.com, would handle the online business, while Blockbuster would take care of the DVDs, making them less dependent on the US Postal Service. The offer was declined.

While they experienced fast growth in early , both the dot-com bubble burst and the September  attacks occurred later that year, affecting the company badly and forcing them to lay off one-third of their  employees. However, sales of DVD players finally took off as they became more affordable, selling for about $ around Thanksgiving time, becoming one of that year's most popular Christmas gifts. By early , Netflix saw a huge increase in their subscription business.

Netflix initiated an initial public offering (IPO) on May , , selling . million shares of common stock at the price of US$. per share. On June , , the company sold an additional , shares of common stock at the same price. After incurring substantial losses during its first few years, Netflix posted its first profit during the fiscal year , earning US$. million profit on revenues of US$ million. In , , different films were available, and Netflix shipped  million DVDs out every day.

Randolph, a dominant producer and board member for Netflix, retired from the company in .

Netflix was sued in  for false advertising in relation to claims of "unlimited rentals" with "one-day delivery".Netflix has been one of the most successful dot-com ventures. In September , The New York Times reported that, at the time, Netflix mailed about , discs per day to its , monthly subscribers. The company's published subscriber count increased from one million in the fourth quarter of  to around . million at the end of the third quarter of , to  million in March . Netflix's early growth was fueled by the fast spread of DVD players in households; in , nearly two-thirds of United States homes had a DVD player. Netflix capitalized on the success of the DVD